Comparison of Parameter Estimation and Fold-Change Predictions across Strains {#AppendixParamEstimation .unnumbered}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The inferred parameter values for $K_A$ and $K_I$ in the main text were
determined by fitting to induction fold-change measurements from a
single strain ($R=260$, $\Delta\varepsilon_{RA} = -13.9~k_BT$, $n=2$,
and $\Delta\varepsilon_{AI}=4.5~k_BT$). After determining these
parameters, we were able to predict the fold-change of the remaining
strains without any additional fitting. However, the theory should be
independent of the specific strain used to estimate $K_A$ and $K_I$;
using any alternative strain to fit $K_A$ and $K_I$ should yield similar
predictions. For the sake of completeness, here we discuss the values
for $K_A$ and $K_I$ that are obtained by fitting to each of the
induction data sets individually. These fit parameters are shown in of
the main text, where we find close agreement between strains, but with
some deviation and poorer inferences observed with the O3 operator
strains. Overall, we find that regardless of which strain is chosen to
determine the unknown parameters, the predictions laid out by the theory
closely match the experimental measurements. Here we present a
comparison of the strain specific predictions and measured fold-change
data for each of the three operators considered.

We follow the approach taken in the main text and use to infer values
for $K_A$ and $K_I$ by fitting to each combination of binding energy
$\Delta \varepsilon_{RA}$ and repressor copy number $R$. We then use
these fitted parameters to predict the induction curves of all other
strains. In we plot these fold-change predictions along with
experimental data for each of our strains that contains an O1 operator.
To make sense of this plot consider the first row as an example. In the
first row, $K_A$ and $K_I$ were estimated using data from the strain
containing $R=22$ and an O1 operator (top leftmost plot, shaded in
gray). The remaining plots in this row show the predicted fold-change
using these values for $K_A$ and $K_I$. In each row, we then infer $K_A$
and $K_I$ using data from a strain containing a different repressor copy
number ($R=60$ in the second row, $R=124$ in the third row, and so on).
In and , we similarly apply this inference to our strains with O2 and O3
operators, respectively. We note that the overwhelming majority of
predictions closely match the experimental data.The notable exception is
that using the $R=22$ strain provides poor predictions for the strains
with large copy numbers (especially $R=1220$ and $R=1740$), though it
should be noted that predictions made from the $R=22$ strain have
considerably broader credible regions. This loss in predictive power is
due to the poorer estimates of $K_A$ and $K_I$ for the $R=22$ strain as
shown in .
