
The opportunity to reflect on having had the experience to do a Ph.D. at an
institution of Caltech's caliber brought me with it a deep reflection of how
unlikely my twenties were. Ten years ago, when my adventure into science began,
I was just a naive kid with a romantic view of what being a scientist meant and
with no real hands-on experience to back up any of such idealized views. On
paper, I was not supposed to be here. Not only I graduated from an institution
that nobody ever heard about, but I was explicitly told by my professors at this
institution that I was "just a kid from Mexico" and that I was not going to
amount to much. My big dreams of making it out of my situation to study abroad
and dedicate my life to understanding the natural world were almost shattered
beyond repair. During this absolute low point of my life, a series of fortunate
events got me here, writing my thesis's acknowledgments section. This journey
over the last decade has only been possible because I have had the immense
fortune of being surrounded by incredible people. I want to take this chance to
recall the story of how I got into Caltech, hopefully thanking every person that
has helped me reach this moment along the way.

As I just mentioned, before coming to Caltech for the first time, my scientific
credentials were next to null. Circumstances I did not choose had me stuck in an
unfavorable situation where almost every professor at my college thought of me
as "a stubborn and hard-headed guy, too ambitious for his good." Multiple
attempts to bring my spirit down were starting to be successful, as I seriously
considered dropping out of college to try my luck with something else. This is
where the first big name on this story appeared. Adrian Jinich, back then a
staff scientist at a nearby research center and a soon-to-be graduate student at
Harvard, came to my middle-of-nowhere school with a simple idea: He was going to
inspire the next generation of Mexican scientists by working with students on a
hands-on project. Those Saturday meetings with Adrian were going to change my
life in unexpected ways. 

Adrian happened to have a textbook that has guided my thinking and my love for
science for the last decade and, with a little bit of more luck, will continue
to do so for decades to come. This textbook, Physical Biology of the Cell, by
Rob Phillips, Jane Kondev, Julie Theriot, and Hernan Garcia instantly became a
pseudo-religious bible to me. Since I was not learning anything useful in
school, I dedicated countless hours to understanding the contents of this
textbook. And, on a lonely night of April 2011, when I was feeling more
desperate than ever after having gotten into a heated discussion with one of my
professors, I sent an innocent email to the first author of the book with zero
expectations of ever receiving a reply. The email said something like this

 Dear Professor Phillips PhD, 

 My name is Manuel Razo, I'm a Mexican student in the National Polytechnic
 Institute in Mexico... The reason for writing you this letter is because I've
 been studying your book... I found fascinating every single page in the book,
 to the point that I'm looking forward to work one day in a topic related with
 biophysics...I know that you are a very busy and important Scientist, but it
 would mean a lot to me if you could give me any advice of what to do in order
 to achieve my goals.

Little I knew that this innocent email would set my career path for the rest of
my life. This was because a few weeks after sending this email, Mr. Phillips
took the time to reply to the message, giving me inspiring words about the way
he sees life and the meaning of being a scientist. One conversation led to
another, and sooner than I realized, Rob challenged me to come up with a project
to work on during a summer internship. Talks with Adrian and a lot of reading
led me to an idea. I wrote down this proposal and sent it to Rob. At this time,
I did not know what to expect. I had never been involved in any research project
or knew what it took to become a Caltech summer student. But, to my fortune, Rob
liked my naive idea and invited me to spend not only the summer but an entire
year working in his lab. There I was, a nobody with no credentials being given
the opportunity of my life.

That year, my horizons expanded like never before. I passed from only
interacting with people with my cultural background that spoke my language to be
in an incredibly diverse and stimulating environment that encouraged bold ideas.
At that time, I met two people that became mentors and friends. James Boedicker,
a postdoc in the lab at the time, now a tenured faculty member at USC, went
beyond what he needed to when he taught me how to do experiments. He taught me
how to use a micropipette, grow bacteria, and organize experimental work. But
his mentoring and advice went beyond lab work. He and his wife Amy invited me
for lunch or dinner on several occasions since they knew I was on an extremely
tight budget. James became my second mentor and my primary guide when it came
time to apply to grad school. His kindness, patience, and caring showed me that
there are multiple facets to every society. Although the news wanted me to
believe that every person in this country automatically hated me because of my
nationality, James' friendship shattered all dumb preconceptions I could have
had.

If there is something I did not expect to come across in a place like Caltech,
that would be Ernie's Mexican food truck's enormous popularity. It was during
the classic Thursday visits to Ernie's truck that I got to interact with Justin
Bois. At the time, Justin was doing his second postdoc at UCLA. He would come
once a week during our group meeting to have the chance to hang out with other
physical biologists. Rob decided to recruit Justin and me as honorary TAs for
his famous Bi1x class. Every Sunday for the next few months, I helped Justin
develop a new module for the class involving fluorescent microscopy on fly
embryos. These interactions turned into a friendship where Justin went beyond
what he had to and treated my family and me unbelievably nicely.

After Rob, Justin has been the scientist that has influenced my thinking the
most. His classes, sharp mind, computational skills, unbelievably ethical
behavior, and his will to share his knowledge set me on the right track from the
beginning of my Ph.D. when Justin started a position as a teaching faculty for
the Biology division. Because of course, I had to come back to Caltech. A year
was not enough, and I needed more. So as soon as I could, I came back to begin
my Ph.D. working again with Rob.

My twenties came and went by faster than I thought. Nevertheless, I had the
immense fortune to share the lab with three of my great friends and co-authors
for all those years. Nathan Belliveau, Muir Morrison, and Griffin Chure became
my lab family. They helped me think through problems and worked with me on
numerous successful (and unsuccessful) projects, as we all grew as scientists
under Rob's tutelage. It is not an exaggeration when I say that their friendship
and support have been a fundamental part of why my Ph.D. experience has been the
best time of my life. I would not do justice to Griffin's influence on my
thinking if I did not give a special shout-out to him. For the past seven years,
Griffin and I talked almost every single day. We fed off each other's ideas and
together traveled the world. From Korea to New Zealand to Sweden, Griffin became
my closest collaborator and someone that every time he has something to say, I
am ready to take notes on whatever comes out of his creative and rigorous mind.



List:

Adrian X
Justin X
James X
Griffin
Muir
Nathan
Heun Jin
Dianne
Wallace
Hernan
The Caldwells
Porfi
Steph
Cat
Christina
My parents
Herman
Amy, Molly, and Casey
Bob
Daniela
