The state of matter that we define as *life* is different from anything else we
have encountered so far in the universe. Living systems not only perpetuate
their existence out of equilibrium against the will of the second law of
thermodynamics, but they do so while keeping up with an ever-changing
environment. A key part of this capacity to adapt to environmental changes is
the ability of organisms to gather information from their surroundings to put
together an adequate response to the challenges presented to them. This thesis
presents an effort to understand, from first principles, this fundamental
feature of information gathering that all life on earth shares. We dig into the
physics behind one of the most pervasive mechanisms through which living systems
sense and respond to the environment--the ability to turn *on* and *off* genes.
In doing so, we hope to uncover general principles of how organisms deal with
the problem of collecting information about the world that surrounds them.

In Chapter 1, we develop the theoretical and conceptual tools to navigate the
rest of the thesis. I introduce the idea of gene regulation, as well as
different theoretical models of this pervasive biological phenomenon. We also
delve into the realm of information theory and learn how the plastic concept of
information can be mathematically defined and quantified.

The second stop in our exploration (Chapter 2) asks the following question: can
we understand, from first principles, how it is that proteins allow cells to
regulate their genes on-demand upon sensing environmental cues? For this, we
explore the physics behind transcriptional control due to allosteric
transcription factors. Using simple quasi-equilibrium models of the two
processes involved in this type of regulation---the regulation of the gene by
the binding and unbinding of the transcription factor, and the regulation of the
activity of the transcription factor itself by the binding and unbinding of an
effector molecule---we are able to predict the input-output function of a simple
genetic circuit, and compare such predictions with experimental determinations
of the mean response of a population of bacterial cells.

We then expand on these insights to ask questions about the inescapable
cell-to-cell variability that isogenic cells encounter. For this, we have to
leave behind the pure thermodynamic framework and work in the language of
chemical kinetics. This allows us to make predictions beyond the mean
input-output gene expression response of cells by reconstructing full gene
expression distributions. With these probabilistic input-output functions, in
Chapter 3 we formalize the question of the *amount of information* that cells
can gather from the environment. For this, we turn to information-theoretic
concepts of maximal mutual information (otherwise known as channel capacity)
between the state of the environment and the gene expression response from
bacterial cells. Finally, we compare our predictions of the maximum amount of
information---measured in bits---that cells can gather with single-cell
inferences of this quantity.
