## Measurement of Steady State {#sec:ch4_sec15}

All measurements have been performed with cells in an exponential growth phase,
where we expect an average expression to be maintained across the cell
population. Here we wanted to use one of our strains (O2 $\Delta\varepsilon_{RA}
= -13.9\ k_BT$, $R=260$) to show that gene expression is under steady-state for
our experimental conditions. As a reminder, we begin by growing an overnight
culture in Lysogeny Broth for each of the required strains under our standard
protocol. After approximately $12$ hours, the saturated cultures are diluted
1000-fold into a $2\,\text{mL}$ 96-deep-well plate. Each well contains
$500\,\mu\text{L}$ of M9 minimal media supplemented with 0.5% w/v glucose and
the appropriate IPTG inducer concentration.

Here we follow the protocol as noted above but take measurements in one-hour
increments after the 1000-fold dilution. We performed this in triplicate with
our O2 $\Delta\varepsilon_{RA} = -13.9\ k_BT$, $R=260$ strain (IPTG inducer
concentration $c=50\,\mu\text{M}$), and also include an autofluorescence strain
and O2 $\Delta lacI$ strain. In [@Fig:ch4_fig31](A) we plot the optical density
(OD$_{600nm}$) as a function of time and see that growth is reasonably
consistent between strains and their replicates. The shaded gray bar indicates
an OD 0.3, which is the density at which we typically make our measurements. In
[@Fig:ch4_fig31](B), we shown the associated fold-change measurements (using
flow cytometry). While it does look like there is a steady increase in
fold-change from 0 to 4 hours, it seems to level off past this time point.
However, there was also a large degree of variation in our measurements, making
it difficult to say that fold-change is not changing over time.

In [@Fig:ch4_fig33] we also plot the raw fluorescence values against the
measured OD$_{600nm}$ values. The variation is rather large, but it does appear
that the overall expression is relatively constant across two decades of
OD$_{600nm}$.

![**Time course measurement of single-cell fluorescence by flow cytometry - data
set 1**. Flow cytometry measurements were performed at different time points
following a 1000-fold dilution of an overnight culture. Cell strains were grown
in M9 minimal media supplemented with 0.5% w/v glucose and IPTG
$c=50\,\mu\text{M}$. OD$_{600nm}$ measurements are shown for the three strains.
(B) The fold-change is calculated for each measurement shown in Panel (A). Note
that each measurement represents a different culture grown in a 96 deep well
plate.](ch4_fig31){#fig:ch4_fig31 short-caption="Time course measurement of
single-cell fluorescence by flow cytometry - data set 1"}

![**Time course measurement of single-cell fluorescence versus OD$_{600nm}$ -
data set 1**. Fluorescence measurements used to calculate fold-change from
[@Fig:ch4_fig31](B) are plotted against their OD$_{600nm}$. Error bars represent
standard deviation from the triplicate culture measurements from growth in a 96
deep well plate.](ch4_fig32){#fig:ch4_fig32 short-caption="Time course
measurement of single cell fluorescence versus OD$_{600nm}$ - data set 1"}

In a separate set of replicates, we observed more consistent fold-change
measurements over these later time points. [@Fig:ch4_fig33](A) shows the average
single-cell fluorescence from these measurements. While there does appear to be
a downward trend in both the $R=260$ strain and the $\Delta$*lacI* strain, this
is perhaps due to cultures leaving exponential growth (mistakenly, OD$_{600nm}$
was not measured in this attempt). In contrast to the data in
[@Fig:ch4_fig32](B), we found that fold-change did not appreciably change across
these measurements ([@Fig:ch4_fig33](B)). Given the differences across these two
sets of experiments, it will be essential to perform more experiments before
drawing any definite opinions about the above results.

![**Time course measurement of single-cell fluorescence by flow cytometry - data
set 2**. Flow cytometry measurements were performed at different time points
following a 1000-fold dilution of an overnight culture. Cell strains were grown
in M9 minimal media supplemented with 0.5% w/v glucose and IPTG
$c=50\,\mu\text{M}$. Mean fluorescence values are shown for strain O2
$\Delta\varepsilon_{RA} = -13.9~k_BT$ with $R=260$, O2 $\Delta lacI$, and an
autofluorescence strain. Data points represent measurements from separate
$500\,\mu\text{L}$ cell cultures. The fold change is calculated for each
measurement shown in Panel .](ch4_fig33){#fig:ch4_fig33 short-caption="Time
course measurement of single-cell fluorescence by flow cytometry - data set 2"}
